Welcome to the Data Science Hangout and hope everybody's having a great week.
I'm Rachel.
I lead our pro community at Posit.
And if you have not been here before, this is our open space to chat about data science
leadership, questions you're facing and forgetting to hear about what's going on in the world
of data across different industries.
So we're here every Thursday at the same time, same place.
So if you are somewhere in the future watching this recording on YouTube, you can always
add it to your calendar with the details and include it below.
Together we're all dedicated to making this a welcoming environment for everyone.
And we all love to hear from everybody, no matter your level of experience or area of
work.
We love to hear from you.
It's also totally okay to just listen in here if you don't want to join in the conversation,
that's okay too.
But there's three ways you can jump in and ask questions or provide your own perspective.
So you can always jump in by raising your hand here on Zoom and I'll be on the lookout.
You can put questions in the Zoom chat.
And if you do want me to read it out instead of you, maybe you're in a cafe or your dog's
barking or something, just put a little star next to your question in the Zoom chat.
And then we also have a Slido link, which my colleagues will be sharing, oh, Tyler just
shared it right now, which they shared in the chat so you can ask questions anonymously
too.
With all that, thank you all so much for joining us here on this Thursday.
I'm so excited to have Brad Weiner here with us as my co-host today.
Brad is the Chief Data Officer at the University of Colorado, Boulder.
And Brad, to get us going here, I'd love to have you just kind of jump in and introduce
yourself, share a little bit about your role and also something you like to do outside
of work too.
Yeah, great.
So thanks so much, Rachel.
I wanted to thank Rachel and everybody from the PASA team for being here.
And I think on behalf of, and hello, Brian, good to see you.
And then of course, it's easy to thank the community developers, but also just thanks
to everyone from the PASA team for helping us do cool stuff in our jobs and in our lives.
So it's super fun to get to hang out with everyone.
My name is Brad Weiner.
I am the Chief Data Officer here at the University of Colorado, Boulder.
And I got into this role in a fairly elliptical way.
I, like many of you, are not technologists to start.
I was actually a creative writing major in college.
And I will die on this hill that data science and technical work is inherently creative
work.
But over time, I started working for universities and in a lot of different roles.
And at some point along the way, someone was like, hey, we need someone to do some reporting
and we need someone to do this.
And I've always liked computers.
I've always liked working with them.
So I'm like, yeah, sure, I'll give that a shot and thought it was unbelievably fun and
interesting and a really cool puzzle to solve.
And over time, got more and more and more engaged in the data side of what colleges
and universities do.
There's also a bump in the road where I was in graduate school and I took a statistics
course.
By the way, hello to all my Minnesota pals out there, but I was at the University of
Minnesota.
And I had a professor who taught his statistics classes using R.
I mean, that was in about 2009 that I was first introduced to the whole concept of sort
of open source data science tools and just totally fell in love with it.
Just thought it was the most fun, most interesting thing that could possibly happen.
And so that led to the opportunity to work on a data science team out in startup land.
And then finally to move here to CU Boulder to lead a data science team here and then
eventually become the chief data officer.
So that's like a little tiny bit of the journey.
I like to kind of give a quick overview of higher ed in general.
This is like maybe sort of boring for people, but I imagine many of you have gone to a university
somewhere around the world and you've had some post-secondary education.
And universities are, they seem like they're like this one thing, right?
But what a university is, is it's just like this collection of thousands of tiny little
units and there's this sort of famous joke that's like, we're hundreds or thousands of
little micro units that are all unified by a common disagreement over parking or a common
disagreement over the temperatures in buildings or a common disagreement over our football
team or whatever.
So let me just give you like a quick sense of what, you know, the president of the University
of California in the 60s was a guy named Clark Kerr, and he referred to the modern university
as a multi-university.
So let me just quickly kind of tell you why we're here.
So the University of Colorado is a research university.
We have three missions.
Our three missions are to engage in research and to create new knowledge out in the world,
to teach and ask that knowledge on to students, and then finally to engage with the public
in what's called the public engagement mission.
And that's translating your research efforts into things that can be broadly valuable.
I mean, that really aligns very closely with what open source tools do.
But we also do a lot more.
We produce art and creative works.
We act as a venue for all kinds of things.
We're a community space.
We have a football team.
We have museums.
We have a bowling alley.
We provide healthcare and patient treatment.
We at least at CU Boulder put a lot of stuff into outer space.
We engage in economic development with the community here in Boulder and the state of
Colorado and internationally.
We at least at CU, we care and feed and sustain a live buffalo named Ralphie who runs around
on the football field.
So the number of things that a single university are engaged in are quite limitless.
And so why I like to lead with this whole spiel is that each one of those results in
a very like almost limitless number of interesting kind of data science questions and problems.
So that's sort of the intro.
And so I definitely want to take most of the time to answer questions for you.
But just if you can imagine all of that complexity, every single one of those components can land
as a data question.
And so why I am here and why our teams are here is to try and think through ways to make
the student experience better, to make the faculty experience better, to make the staff
experience better, to make us work more effectively, work more efficiently, to make it so that
the people of Colorado have the best possible university that they can have.
So with that, I'm loving this chat, by the way.
Yeah, I love that.
I love that intro too.
But we forgot one thing.
What do you like to do outside of work as well?
What do I like to do outside of work?
So recently I decided I needed to spend less time in front of the screen.
And so I started taking piano lessons, which I encourage anyone, especially if you're sort
of later in life or midlife, to just try something totally new.
I walk into these piano lessons and the person before me is an eight-year-old girl who's
amazing.
And I'm like barely making it through the trouble staff.
So I've really been enjoying learning to play piano and getting back into music.
I love that.
Yeah.
Thanks for that question, Rachel.
I just started taking guitar lessons a few weeks ago too.
So like actually learning music theory again after like fourth grade flute class.
Patrick, I see you have your hand raised here to jump in with a question you want to jump in.
Thanks, Rachel.
Hi, everybody.
And thanks, Brad, for being here.
I appreciate your time.
First, I just want to say I love universities too and like their weirdness and flaws and
all the kind of strange things about them.
But your enthusiasm for it and the way you articulated that just now was awesome.
So thank you very much.
I really enjoyed that and appreciate how into it you are.
My question is specific to the university system.
If you have any examples of where you have really like influenced an institutional level
decision or maybe just for a school or department, but where you all have really shaped something
like a real impact story from your data science work for the university.
Yeah, that's a great question.
And so Patrick, I'm guessing you have experience in academia or in higher ed.
You seem to know the space pretty well.
Making the data work is the easy part.
Getting people to actually use the data and sort of inform policies is much trickier.
And I also always like to point to the fact that it really does take a village.
We need all kinds of people to be invested and interested in a project.
But there is one that we've sort of been pointing to lately, which was just released publicly
to kind of quietly because it happened during finals.
One of the things that we've thought a lot about is ways to make it so that students
have as easy of an experience as possible.
Because we really, really want students to be successful.
Not just because that's like our core mission, but we're measured on that.
All universities are measured on that in a lot of ways.
And students want to go to a place where they're going to be successful.
So we're constantly looking for what I would consider, and I know this is kind of gross
terminology for people in higher ed, but building a college degree really is a supply
chain problem.
You know, you need to have all of these constituent parts, and they need to land at the right
time, and there's tons of dependencies, and those dependencies need to be built out years
in advance.
So if we don't have enough chemistry labs, that student doesn't get to take chemistry.
And if not enough students take chemistry, they don't have the required courses, and
they can't graduate.
So we're constantly looking for these things.
And one of the things that we have found is that students found that the prices of their
textbooks to be something of a barrier.
And one of the things that we actually found, we're not only trying to graduate students,
but we're trying to graduate everybody as equitably as possible.
If the experience is one way for some students and one way for another group of students,
that is not considered success.
And so what we were finding and what we had heard and what we learned is that students
were potentially choosing which courses to take based on the cost of the textbooks.
And there's also a little bit of this mode of understanding now that the students of
today are used to subscription services.
Nobody ever thinks like, oh, how many songs did I listen to on Spotify?
Am I getting my money's worth?
They're just used to Netflix or these models where you just pay one price and you get everything.
And it doesn't matter how much you use it or how little you use it.
So Patrick, to answer your question, this is kind of the long way around, but to answer
your question, we just recently deployed, and you can read about it publicly, but we're
one of the first handful, maybe a dozen or 15 schools that have gone in on this kind
of bookstore equity access model, which is basically students pay one price.
And that gives them sort of financial stability, the predictability in their budgets, their
ability to budget on books, but also the ability to be really flexible in what they take.
And by paying that one price, they get day one, what we call day one digital access.
And there's also evidence that students who, I mean, think about your college days, right?
You go and you take a class.
The professor gives the old like, look to your left, look to your right, one of you
is going to fail.
And you're like, I'm out of here.
And so then what you have to do is you have to go, you have to go back to the bookstore,
you have to return that book.
And so we have found, and there's evidence that having digital immediate access to your
books is actually a student success lever.
And so for a variety of reasons, we wanted to implement this program.
And one of the things that we were asked to do is, what price should the bundle be?
And if any of you have worked in pricing, it's a really complicated problem.
If the price is too high, nobody participates and the whole thing kind of collapses on itself.
And if it's too low, you don't cover your costs.
And so we had a whole team of people who are sort of thinking through that problem.
And Rachel was very clear.
She's like, you do not need to shill for Posit.
But we are happy to say that we used our super sweet Posit workbench setup to simulate a
whole bunch of different options.
The data science team did that.
And we were able to help them provide, to guide them on what that price was.
And it got deployed out.
And so next year, from what I understand, all undergraduates at CU Boulder will pay
$279 a semester and get all of their books on day one.
And if they drop a class, then those books go away and the new ones come in and they
just have access to their books.
Patrick, I think it'll be valuable to follow up with me a year from now and see how well
we did.
Because this is a known unknown.
We're going to have to see where I landed.
That is a great example.
Thank you very much.
And really, not what I was expecting in terms of the example you choose, but just kind of
demonstrates how broad the impact could be in an area that's so complex and diverse,
like you described.
So thank you.
That's wonderful.
Yep.
You got it.
Sorry, I need to read the chat.
It's less than I was paying 20 years ago.
So that's...
Yeah.
We'll see how we do.
That's amazing.
There's a lot of love for that example in the chat here too.
I see, Abigail, you had asked a question in the chat a little bit earlier.
Do you want to jump in here?
Thanks, Rachel.
Yeah.
This is something like multiple organizations I've been part of, I've been trying to figure
out like what to use for data viz.
So I see you guys are doing like a lot of Tableau dashboards and Tableau public.
What was...
So how did you think that through as an organization, like what data viz tools to use?
So that is a great question.
I'm sorry, your name is Abigail?
I didn't see where I can highlight.
Yes.
Awesome.
So thanks for that great question.
Data viz is eternally complicated because the technology is always moving.
And then I think it's also fair to point out that higher ed tends to be a fairly conservative
industry and it tends to buy things in like big ways.
So hey, we want to spin up a Posit server and just test it out on 10 users is usually
a little bit different than like, what is the best way that we can like use our tremendous
buying power to have everybody in the same tool?
And so it's always kind of striking a balance, but a lot of universities have gone in pretty
deep on, I don't know if I'm allowed to say it, but on Tableau.
If a third of you hang up right now, I will not blame you.
You can say whatever you want.
No, I know, but I'm just, so anyway, Tableau is kind of an industry standard across what's
called institutional research.
So universities have all these compliance regulations, they need to report on a bunch
of stuff.
And so Tableau is just like pretty commonly used and has been for about the last 10 years.
So we do use no comment Bill, but you're potentially correct.
But one of the things that we're constantly thinking through are ways to leverage more
modern technology.
And then one of the things that's a really interesting problem space is that Tableau
doesn't necessarily provide semantic HTML underneath as part of its API calls.
And what that means is that it's actually a little bit difficult to access with screen
readers.
And of course, we're a public university, we put out a bunch of public data.
And one of the things we want to make sure we do is have as accessible of visualizations
and accessible access to our information as possible.
And so Tableau provides a ton of value for a lot of reasons, and people really like being
able to explore the data.
But we are also looking at other ways to potentially visualize information and put out data.
There's also just people who want to use open source tools.
And so there's always the conversation of like, how big can we scale things like Flask
or Streamlit or Shiny?
And I know that those are amazing options, and I love them.
But we haven't gotten to a point of like, sort of like institution wide buying.
So we pick Abigail in the way that we pick a lot of things, which is through a process
called satisficing, which is like, well, the university up the road is doing it seems
good enough.
It'll be fine.
We'll go with that.
And then we're mostly happy with what we get until something better comes along.
And all of the open source questions I totally agree with.
And we just haven't gotten there yet.
So those of you who work in like your cool startup with 50 people, and you're like, oh,
well, we were in Streamlit for three weeks, and it didn't work for this.
And now we're going to pivot over to Shiny or whatever.
It's just a lot harder for us to move the sort of gravity of such a big organization.
And I will say Tableau has a lot of advantages, it has a lot of functionality, although it
does not have a spell check.
So what does that mean?
I see Lisa had a follow up to your story that you shared about the book pricing.
Lisa, do you want to jump in?
I'm lunching right now, which is rather early for Minnesota, but so it is.
Yeah, I was just curious if you shared out and maybe it's a little too early, any of
the findings about the books, because I know having been in academia, that, you know, at
least McAllister was sort of thinking about that problem as well.
Yeah, we're still pretty new to it.
And higher ed, like seemingly has, like never has a mythical first mover.
But there are a couple of schools that have gone in on this, including University of California
at Davis.
And so they're the ones who have sort of the most information about it.
I would be happy to share and, you know, talk with the people who actually built this out.
But right now we are launching it for this fall.
And so it'll be a little while before we have any like real outcome data.
But of course, the really exciting part will be, can we measure whether or not that particular
intervention had an impact on student success?
And so probably a year or two years from now, we'll have some like real data on what it
all meant.
Right now, we were just trying to get the thing out the door and put a price on it.
But all the cool stuff is yet to happen.
Also hi, Lisa.
I know Lisa from, you know, tangentially through the Twin Cities data science community.
So it's good to see, good to see my Minnesota peeps in here.
Likewise.
I see.
Oh, sorry.
I see, Alan, you had asked a question a little bit earlier in the chat.
Do you want to jump in here next?
Yeah, sure.
Hi, Brad.
And everybody.
It's super fun today.
Brad, I'm really curious where your role lives within the institution.
Like is it, are you strongly connected to IT?
Are you in administration?
And I've got to think that where you kind of live organizationally has got impact on
like how work comes to you, how you get to decide what to do, how you're prioritized,
all those kinds of things.
Just if you could kind of expand on that, that'd be great.
Yeah, that's a great question, Alan.
I work in the sort of administrative side.
But I have a really good, I have a colleague who's a chief data officer, and he will basically
say that if you run or work with a data organization, and I would probably apply this to any of
your organizations, although I only, I know my industry best, but if you are a centralized
data team, and you're not serving everybody, you're failing.
And maybe that's a little bit harsh, because it might not be set up that way everywhere.
But for us, we want to support academic units, we want to support academic leadership, we
want to support colleges and schools and programs, just as much as we want to support the auxiliary
units parking in the bookstore and finance and budget and enrollment and all of those
things.
So our role in the most big picture way is to support students, faculty and staff, and
to engage in those three missions as much as we possibly can.
And parsing out where the boundaries are is really, really tough.
So people on my team, for instance, we have a whole team that does surveys.
And those surveys help understand how students are engaging on campus, what their sense of
belonging is, what type of activities they're participating in.
But one of the things we do is we run what are called the faculty course questionnaires
for all of campus.
So every time you get to the end of semester, and you go, you know, this professor was great,
or this professor wasn't so great, all of those data are sort of publicly available
and come through this data group.
And that provides us opportunities to really talk about student success through the lens
of teaching and learning and through the lens of how students are engaging in the classroom.
And then, of course, there's a whole discipline of kind of what's known as learning analytics.
So if you Google that, there's all kinds of papers that are out there.
But you know, the degree to which students in different classes perform on different
types of exercises or different types of, you know, in different types of learning environments,
also matters.
So I, a bunch of years ago, I had the opportunity to work with a kind of multi-institutional
team from around the Big Ten.
And we were trying to understand whether or not there was any difference in academic performance
based on a student's self-reported gender identity in introductory STEM classes.
And it was really fascinating, because one, it was like an amazing data engineering problem.
And you're like, well, we have a five-hour chemistry class, and they have a three-hour
chemistry class.
Are those the same?
So like, harmonizing data across a bunch of universities was like, insanely complicated.
But it delved really deeply into, you know, the unit of analysis of like the individual
course.
And then, of course, you can go even lower, like, what about the section?
What about the instructor?
And we are here to support efforts like that as well.
Which by the way, is why this job is so epically fun, because for three weeks, you're talking
about bookstore prices, and then you're trying to figure out like, why courses that have
just a midterm and a final are different from courses that have a variety of assessments
along the way.
So I don't know, that was kind of a long answer.
But the gist is like, we live where we live organizationally, but we have touch points
across the university.
And if we didn't, we wouldn't have as good of an ability to answer the really hard questions
where those two things land in exactly the same spot.
You know, a student might not be successful because they might have basic needs problems,
they might need additional financial aid, they might not have a sense of belonging,
they might not be engaged in the community.
They might also just really not be that good at math and need help with that.
And all of that is part of the kind of interconnected sort of supply chain.
That's great.
Thank you.
It sounds like such a really fascinating place to work with so much variety of problems and
teams and people, like juggling a ton, but it sounds really, really neat.
Thanks.
Yeah, of course, it's completely wild.
But it is fun.
It's an incredible amount of fun.
Definitely.
Yeah, it's really interesting to hear about the different variety of problems you get
to work on.
I think when we were talking a bit earlier, Brad, you mentioned that there aren't that
many schools today that have a chief data officer.
And I was wondering for schools who are maybe like in that spot of starting out to or like
starting this role of chief data officer, if you have any tips to share them?
Yeah, I get this question pretty often.
And so I'm gonna get my numbers a little bit wrong, but there's roughly 4000 or 5000 institutions
in the United States that receive title for funding.
Maybe it's actually probably a little bit higher, but that's everything from like, the
California Barber College to Stanford.
And that's basically title for funding means, you know, that they're eligible for federal
student loans, or, well, that's, that's probably it.
They're probably in the, you know, in the Higher Education Act, which Congress never
reauthorizes.
So we're always under like 20 year old rules.
But there's 1000s and 1000s and 1000s of universities, and I'll just get on my soapbox for four seconds
to say, remember that number, the next time you read in the New York Times or the Wall
Street Journal or the Washington Post that it's so hard to get into college.
It's not.
We have so many choices, and most schools admit most students.
So I always like to just tell people like, the national media does not paint a very good
picture of the higher ed landscape at all.
Off the soapbox of those two, from what I understand, there's probably 50 or so chief
data officers or fewer people with that title.
There is a very traditional function in higher ed called institutional research, which sort
of reports out all the numbers to the federal government, and they typically do this kind
of work.
So I'm not trying to pick on you, Lisa, but they're at Macalester in St. Paul, they actually
have a really amazing institutional research office that's run by really cool people.
But if you've worked in higher ed, you've at some point bumped into your kind of IR
group.
If you want to know anything about a university, these data are publicly available.
And so there's someone who submits all of those data, and it's usually IR.
But what's happening more and more is institutions are realizing that their data is this core
institutional asset, and that the more value that can be gotten out of those data, the
better the institution can do, and the better that they can support students.
There's also a growing sort of sense that with the regulatory framework and with compliance
frameworks and what the need for data governance and what the need for sort of more standardized
policies around data, that, oh, look, we have an iPads key holder, look at that, cool, nice
to see you, George.
But the conversation around how do we broadly manage our data is something that a chief
data officer should be responsible for.
And I wouldn't say it's like a weekly thing, but I'd say that probably like once a month,
some university reaches out to me on LinkedIn and is like, should we have a chief data officer?
What does that mean?
What does the sort of construct look like in higher ed?
And just like it was a growing trend in industry probably over the last 10 years, it's
now sort of catching up in higher ed.
And yes, there's a little bit of a chat, iPads is the integrated post-secondary education
data system.
If you want to know like the number of enrolled Asian students at the University of Texas
El Paso, it's all in there, and it's publicly available.
Thank you.
Yep.
I always do a double check on acronyms.
Deepa, I see you had a question in the chat.
Do you want to jump in here next?
Sure.
Thanks, Rachel.
If I get a cough attack, I might hand it back to you to complete the question.
I'll be ready.
This has been really fascinating to learn about the setting of university and kind of
problems that you have.
I'm a data scientist at Microsoft, and usually in a business setting, I know the challenge
that you spoke of is someone actually taking the action on the analysis you're doing is
a really big challenge.
And so on here, a lot of times we don't pick up analysis that could be interesting because
we don't have the identified stakeholders that would actually take the action or willing
to take the action, but it's also chicken and egg.
Like if they don't see the analysis, they don't know what possible action they could
take.
So how do you overcome that challenge?
How do you pick out the projects?
How do you prioritize them considering you mentioned such a vast variety of projects
you're able to take?
Yeah, I would say carefully and imperfectly, you know, and I think it's one of the coolest
things and I have to give a hat to deposit into Rachel.
One of the coolest things about getting in a room like this is realizing that we all
have the same challenges.
You know, I always had this idea like, oh, you work at Amazon, you work at Microsoft,
like they've solved everything.
And I've worked in higher ed, right?
Like this place, it's been here since 1876.
It's not going anywhere soon, but it's certainly decentralized and compartmentalized and has
those same type of organizational challenges.
And I'm not bagging on CU, I'm bagging on, you know, I'm not even bagging on, I'm describing
the reality of being in a university environment.
And I would say that mostly we take on projects in a what will ostensibly have the largest
potential impact for students or for what we're trying to do.
There's also a little bit of a conversation that I think I've thought deeply about DeepShot,
which is like, what is within your span of control?
And sometimes it's like, it's not, it's, you know, and this might come across as the easy
road out, but it's like, what are things that we could directly impact or influence?
And then there are also times where it is the decision is made in ways that I refer to as
like, you're bringing water to the desert, where occasionally there are people that have
nothing, they are just totally out in the open.
And so on that like dimension of like, what's easy for us versus what's valuable to them is
like such in the sweet spot, because the simplest, most basic thing, it's like someone's just
been asking forever, like, all I need is this one thing and to be able to get at it routinely.
And you're like, hold my beer, let's focus the sprint, let's focus the cycles on that one
thing. And those tend to be the situations where people come back and they're like, thank you so,
so much, we just needed this one dashboard.
So I would say like, you know, if there's the thing that's easy for you and high value to
someone else, that's worthwhile.
If there's something where you really feel like it's totally within your galaxy to be like,
hey, we had this finding, that finding suggests we shouldn't do this again.
You're the person who's directly responsible for that.
Don't do that again.
And like, that's right within your sort of frame of reference or within your span of control.
And then, of course, as someone who just in case you can't tell, I'm kind of a wacky guy.
I really value fun and joy and being a little bit weird, which I think is okay.
And that one tiny corner of your whole portfolio should just be that random thing that seems like
it's going to be a ton of fun to work on because those are the kinds of things that keep people
engaged.
And a lot of times it isn't like fun in some whimsical way, but it's just new, like this
bookstore thing.
That was hard work.
It was a complicated problem, but it was probably like five weeks of work.
It was time boxed and it was that one thing.
And then we passed it on and we're like, oh, that was cool.
We got to run tens of thousands of simulations on student opt-out behavior.
Now back to our regularly scheduled program and we kind of can focus on the core stuff again.
So is that helpful?
No, it definitely is.
And it's great to see like how that value to effort constant measurement, like it has
to be done in almost any setting.
It's common and it's constant.
So thank you so much for sharing.
And you did ask another question about like, how do you convince people to use the data?
And that is, I think, you know, it just takes time and it takes trust and it takes effort.
And it's also a recognition that it is not a linear path of like, we're getting better
and better and better.
And every single time there's more trust.
It's like you go from step one to step two, and that's great.
And step two to step three, and that's great.
And then people start coming to you more.
And then you totally box something and you're back to step one because the thing went sideways.
And so I like to think that organizations are more resilient than we think they are.
And that mistakes are sort of less damaging than we think they are in most cases.
And so people shouldn't be too hard on themselves.
If you're like, we found this thing and then people go, oh, that's cool.
Right on.
We're still going to do this other thing.
And you're like, but you might not want to do that because the data say this.
And I will say that like higher ed is especially prone to folklore and to, you know, and to
people believing that their experience is sort of outweighing data.
That's changing a lot.
But one of the most fun parts about working in higher ed,
and this is one of the things that I was talking to Rachel about, is that
if you work in some industries, finding the inefficiencies is really hard
because all of the inefficiencies have already been found.
And in higher ed, they're kind of like all over the place.
So it's pretty cool.
But to give you guys a quick story about folklore,
has anyone ever heard the myth that students choose which college they're going to go to
based on the weather on the day that they visit campus?
Anyone ever been down that one?
I have.
Someone has?
Yeah.
Oh, man.
I was, I really wanted to go to school,
but it was rainy and terrible.
There's no way I'm going there.
So it's maybe a little bit of an admissions joke, but there is some mythology around that.
I happen to used to work at the University of Minnesota.
Minnesota has famously great weather.
And I tested that assumption and it turns out to be false.
And that included pulling hour by hour data,
weather data for every single day for like going back to years and years and years
and matching that up with when students visited.
But to make it even more interesting, I know I'm talking to a bunch of data people,
so you're all gonna be like, how did you do that?
I actually calculated not the weather on campus,
but I calculated the delta of the weather on campus from where they came.
Because I'm imagining someone from Southern California being like,
wow, this is a shocking difference.
And I modeled that like in every possible way.
It was full on p-hacking data torture and I couldn't find anything to support that assumption.
So the next time you hear that one, college admissions people,
I tested it in truly one of the worst climates or the most extreme climates in America.
And it's not true.
That is such an interesting, this is absolutely love it.
Thank you for your great question.
Thank you.
I see Michael had asked a question in the chat and there's stars, so I'm going to read it.
But it was, Brad, do you have any experiences or stories in using data science techniques
to attempt to measure the effectiveness of CU's strategic communication efforts?
Particularly in terms of things like, well, I guess this past example could kind of tie to this,
but particularly in terms of things like recruiting effectiveness
or public sentiment to university outreach efforts.
Yeah, that's a copy of the question over into the chat again too.
Yeah, that's a great question.
We have a lot of connections with what at universities are called,
is called like enrollment management.
And they ask questions like that all the time.
And I don't want to go too much into the details because
it's sort of complicated to tease out.
But that is sort of a really common set of questions that are asked,
which is like, really, what is the effectiveness of anything?
What is the effectiveness of a virtual visit versus an on-campus visit?
What is the effectiveness of an email versus a paper mailing?
And those are the types of things that are routinely asked.
And that if you work in an organization that does sort of marketing work
or does communications work, those are also, I think,
some of the highest value conversations to have in data science land.
Because so often what we do is very tough to append a specific cost
or a specific sort of ROI to.
And so there are things like that where you're like, look,
you know, we sent out this mailer.
Did it work or did it not?
We sent out this email communication.
Or what was the effect of that?
Or what was the effect of that on different students?
And, you know, email is basically free.
So it's sort of a arcane and not very important research question.
But there are questions of like, you know,
this whole combination of communications, what do those do?
And if they are found to have limited impact,
then it's easy or tends to be easy to make that argument of like,
you really should pivot these dollars to something else.
And enrollment management is becoming increasingly scientific.
I mean, it really is.
There's a guy, his name is Brock Tybert.
He's going to be mad at me that I mentioned his name.
But he thinks of it as like a science, enrollment science, you know,
because what you have are millions of high school graduates.
And you need to land a class that is big enough to, you know,
it needs to be big enough to support your operations.
It needs to be the right size.
But you also need to have that across different majors
and different colleges and different programs.
And you need balance across all these different things.
So if you Google the concept of enrollment management
or enrollment science, you'll find a bazillion papers out there
on how this happens.
And it starts with like millions and millions and millions
and millions and millions of people
whose name gets entered into a database, basically.
And this is also a really fascinating conversation now
because COVID had a dramatic effect on this entire industry.
One of the big things was that many, many, many more schools
are now no longer requiring the SAT or the ACT.
And in so doing, the SAT and ACT were the primary source
of a lot of these names.
And so even like getting the kind of marketing apparatus
going around student enrollment is a different story
than it was even three to five years ago.
But the short answer is yes.
And you can find all kinds of resources
and information online about that.
You can also look me up on LinkedIn.
And I used to work at a startup that did that very thing,
which was email marketing campaigns
to prospective college students.
And we had a ton of research and information
on how to do that well.
I'll share your LinkedIn in the chat here in a second too.
And I'm sorry if sometimes I have to be vague.
I probably, I don't wanna get myself in hot water
by sharing results that are probably not shareable.
That's okay, we're used to that.
But at least it's not the sports people.
I'm a sports analytics person.
We did a thing and it made us win.
Sorry, I can't say anymore.
Yeah, that's a hard one.
Scott, I see you had asked a question earlier.
I think it was about Connect, if you wanna jump in.
Yeah, sure.
No, I appreciate this conversation.
So I'm also in the kind of higher ed data analytics
and IR world over at Georgetown.
Resonate with a lot of comments about Tableau
and that this space and Power BI
and everything around it, Looker, you name it.
But curious, I think I have kind of found a team of folks
who's really curious and sees an enormous amount
of potential in the open source space
in the orbit of R and Python and that sort of thing.
And I was curious whether you have a Connect server
up and going, whether you're kind of working with it
in a production fashion or whether you've thought about it
or we're headed in that direction
and it isn't as common in IR as I might have thought.
So yeah, just curious about whether you've thought
in that space.
We have, and I think that it is certainly a direction
we'd be interested in pursuing
is going into open source visualization tools.
We do have kind of an interoperable,
multilingual data science team.
And by the way, this is only on the administrative side.
There are of course probably hundreds
of academic units out there.
Scott, as you know, like who knows
if the physics department has like a massive server
and they're deploying everything.
Like who knows, right?
Very possible.
I actually like to give you a sense
of how decentralized higher ed is.
It was easier for me to ask Rachel,
which other people on CU's campus were using Posit
rather than finding out myself.
So like that's the world that we're in.
If anybody wants to know,
you can always ask me or your own organization.
Yeah.
So I honestly think that as powerful
and as great as those tools are,
we still haven't exactly figured out
how to make that happen.
And some of that is kind of tradition
and sort of common use of existing tools.
And then some of that is the sort of deployment question,
which is like one of the biggest complaints you get
when you're working in a bigger organization.
It's like, please don't give me something else to log into.
My bookmark bar is already like 900 things.
But Scott, I would think that
if you have the appetite to build it,
and then of course there's like the cost structure around it,
you know, where, you know,
deploying something in Posit isn't free,
but it's definitely cheaper than other options.
But I would love to connect
and sort of hear what your journey is like.
We do have a couple of people
who have built stuff in Shiny,
but then, you know, we go,
well, some end user wants to touch that
and interact with it.
And that end user is almost certainly
not going to have the skills
to even like fire up an IDE
and like run the framework.
So we're probably in early days on that.
But I think what's probably a more likely path
is that we would at least to start,
and this is all like just me brainstorming
in front of 127 people on a high wire,
would be that we would use some of the HTML,
like the semantic HTML frameworks
that come from open source tools.
So we would deploy using something like Flex Dashboard
or something like,
something like, oh my gosh,
why is my brain falling out of my ear?
High Chart, which is free use
for academic institutions
to just like deploy HTML web pages
and put those out there.
I think that would be kind of our like gateway
into a full deployment of something like Shiny.
Yeah, thanks so much.
And like, I may ping you later,
because again, we're at the front end
of this and I think on one hand,
see a lot of potential,
but also there's just a lot of inertia elsewhere
in the organization, as you well know,
and as we've already talked about this morning.
So, yep, yep.
It's a hard problem to move people
into a new technical space.
But Scott, I could share some other paths
we're going down as well, which are pretty cool.
Yeah, great, thanks.
Yep.
I see, Peter, you had a follow-up question.
I think it was maybe on the weather use case,
but I'm not sure.
Do you want to jump in here?
Oh, there you are.
Oh, sure.
I was just wondering if your test
to that question was looking at all of the institutions
that they were applying to,
or if they were only able to look at one.
Oh, man.
If we had comparative data
across a bunch of institutions,
that would be amazing,
but it was just for my single institution.
And so, yes, I should be a much better data scientist
and put a bunch of asterisks at the end of that description.
That finding was limited and localized
and not generalizable to any institution
beyond the single one that I did the analysis on
over the time period that I did it on
and the population that I did it on.
So, fully great question.
You know, Peter, because we have a bunch of
compliance rules,
you know, there's a federal law called FERPA,
which is the Federal Education Records Protection Act.
There's a lot of stuff that we can't share.
And so, getting a multi-institution level data set
at the unit of analysis of student level records
is really, really, really complicated.
And institutions are just very reluctant to share,
not necessarily, like, we're very,
like, we're very good at sharing.
So, you know, Scott just asked that question
and I have every confidence.
Patrick just asked the question that IR people
or institutional analytics people,
you all can call me up.
And one of the best parts about HigherEd
is we all have the same mission.
We are nominally in competition,
but we're really trying to just provide an economic ladder,
provide research,
make the world a little bit better of a place.
So, we're widely collaborative.
People can call up and go,
hey, how'd you do this?
And I will just straight up tell people
how that worked.
But the data sharing,
the ability to do those multi-institutional analyses
is quite challenging in a lot of cases.
But one of the things we're actually working on here at CU
is following after the healthcare industry,
we are starting to develop fully synthetic data sets
that will allow us to do that.
And I don't know many institutions that are doing that,
but I'm really excited for a future
where we could create synthetic data sets
that mirror this essentially the distributions
that exist in a real data set,
but don't fall under the data privacy
and data protections of a federal law.
But great question, Peter.
I hope I answered that sufficiently.
Thank you.
AJ, I see you had just asked a question in the chat.
You wanna jump in here next?
Yeah, sorry if I missed it maybe earlier
if you mentioned it already,
but did your company start off with having a data office
or if not, like what sort of efforts it took
to create your role?
Because today a lot of big,
even big companies sit on piles of data,
but data is something just that's lumped under IT normally.
Just wondering your take on that.
Yeah, so I haven't been here at CU for too, too long.
So the history is maybe a little bit murky,
but pretty much every university has had an office
that's typically called institutional research
that has focused on these kinds of analytic questions.
And then of course,
reporting to the various agencies that require reporting.
So here in Colorado,
we have a bunch of requirements
that we report to the state of Colorado.
We have a bunch of connections with the city of Boulder
to make sure that we're integrated there.
We have a bunch of connections with the federal government
because of Title IV funding,
because of research funding.
So we have a lot of data needs
to make sure that we are being in compliance
and that we're being as effective as possible.
So the kind of tradition of having a data office
in higher ed goes way back.
I mean, decades and decades and decades.
But as the sort of appetite for data has grown
and as the appetite for people to make smarter decisions
and more sort of data informed decisions has grown,
these data conversations
have gotten bigger and bigger and bigger.
So do you have someone who's there
to deploy and analyze surveys?
Do you have somebody who is there
to do research on how faculty are performing,
to have, to understand how students are performing,
to really think through not just how many questions,
but what is the relationship between X and Y questions?
And then finally, the third kind of layer of that
is just like, how do we make the best use of our data
in a secure and a systematic way?
How do we democratize it?
How do we scale it?
How do we govern it?
And so I would say that like every university,
no matter how big or small,
I mean, the smallest community college anywhere
probably has some, even if it's one person,
some person who's doing analytic work.
But I think having kind of a centralized,
systematic networked office
that's responsible for thinking about data as an asset
is probably a growing trend.
But I went to like a Gartner thing a year or two ago
and they had like a little higher ed table
and it was like, oh, so you're the six,
but I imagine that you go a year from now
and there'll be 12.
And I imagine you go a year from then,
there'll be 40 and higher ed is often last to the party,
but we kind of track the trends that go on
in industry quite often.
Thank you.
Oh, sorry.
Oh, no, I was just saying, thank you.
Thank you.
Of course.
Thank you all for the great questions too.
As we get to the top of the hour here,
if there's anything I missed,
feel free to raise your hand here on Zoom
so I can see it as well and can call you in here.
But Brad, one question, actually,
one of my colleagues had asked this earlier,
but they mentioned they saw something online
that you host a community of practice event
and was just curious to learn like how that came together
and how you publicized it.
Yeah, that's a great question.
So there was an online community of practice,
there was sort of a Zoom meeting when I first joined CU
and what we find,
and I think this gets back a little bit
to Deepa's question,
which is like,
how do you get people to sort of be in the experience?
And the College of Engineering has analysts
and all these places have analysts
and they all have people who are working on similar problems.
And so the better we are able to coordinate everybody
and the better we're able to sort of work with everybody,
the better we do.
So we built out this data community of practice
and it was a Zoom thing and we invited some guests
and I haven't looked through the whole list here,
but I may have hit some of you up to be guests at some point.
I know one person in particular,
but anyway, we'd have people come in
and talk about data governance or master data management
or we'd have people come in and talk about different things.
And the idea sort of surfaced of like,
we're all kind of tired of staring at each other
on Zoom a little bit.
This is amazing because you're all distributed
all over the world,
but we have a need to build this community.
And so we decided to have an event
and we actually jokingly,
I mean, I name things so stupidly.
The biggest problem in computer science is naming things.
It's why I'm never going to be a computer scientist
because I'm terrible at naming things.
But we straight up went with like IRL,
like we're going to have a data community practice conference
in real life.
And let's all get into the room together
and let's focus on a couple of things.
One, we wanted to do some actual technical training
and provide that value to our campus.
So we had one training session that was in R
in the tidyverse
and we had another one that was in Tableau.
And it was just a chance to sort of take
some real experts in that
and lift a bunch of boats all at once.
And then we had some sort of broader conversations,
including a keynote speaker who spoke
about the need to think about data
in more equitable ways.
We are constantly having this conversation
about these important conversations
around diversity and equity
and around racism and anti-racism.
And believe it or not,
if you haven't spent time thinking about it,
the way you collect data,
the way you capture data,
the way you count people matters.
And so we brought in someone who is an expert in this.
His name is Carson Bird.
We brought him in from the University of Michigan
to really talk to everybody
and to have like a thought provoking conversation
around the ways that data may or may not reflect
the communities that we're trying to represent.
And then we also gave people the opportunity
to do some lightning talks,
which were absolutely amazing.
We invited people from around campus to basically say,
for 15 minutes, you have the opportunity
to talk about a problem that is vexing you.
And I cannot tell you enough how cool it was.
And I would recommend it to any of your organizations
to not only stand up a community of practice
and just to get people together and say like,
hey, what are you working on?
What problems do you have?
But to occasionally do your best
to try and get everybody together
in a meaningful way.
Because people walked out of that, in my view,
not only technically better,
but with the ability to sit down and eat lunch
with that person who sits across campus
and is working on the same thing.
So the Zoom thing came together before me,
but we kind of were like, you know what?
Let's get off Zoom for a day and a half.
And it was a ton of fun.
Highly recommend.
I love that.
Love anything to do with community.
That sounds awesome.
Okay, we have a few minutes here,
so I might just rapid fire the remaining questions to you.
All right, I'll see if I can do them in like 20 seconds.
Let's see how many we can get through.
Tsering asked, have you done any analysis
of the chances of a student
successfully finishing a course or failing out?
Yeah, that's a really, really common type of analysis
that happens in higher ed
is trying to estimate a student's likelihood.
But again, we're not here to filter people out
or to make people feel...
There isn't some sort of channel for that.
What it allows us to do
is it allows us to focus our resources,
like any predictive model,
on the students that might need additional help.
So if we can estimate that a student
might not be successful in a particular class,
it isn't like, don't take that class.
It's what support can we give you
so that you are successful?
Thank you.
And I think you answered this one in the chat,
but is there a likelihood of colleges
to move to AWS or Azure completely?
Yeah, I mean, hang out in my email for a day
and you'll see that higher ed,
I mean, it's a massive industry.
There are thousands of universities.
And yes, there are institutions
that have fully gone into a variety of cloud environments
for a variety of reasons.
So no doubt.
Cool.
And I think maybe one last question I missed
was you talked about synthetic data sets.
Do you have any packages you could recommend or approaches?
I would need to get back to you.
I think that we're building those in Python
and my Pythonic chops are a little bit weaker.
So I could find out what we're using.
And yes, I forgot to drop my favorite fun fact,
which is that IPython was a side project
of a grad student at CU Boulder in the early 2000s.
So Fernando Perez is a physicist
and realized it wasn't an interactive way to touch Python.
And so there's some lab around here
in which IPython and subsequently Jupyter were born.
So depending on your view of CU, of Jupyter notebooks,
either you're welcome or I'm sorry.
Well, thank you so much, Brad.
I think that we got through most,
if not all of the questions,
but if there's anything you missed
and anybody wants to send it my way,
I can share it with Brad as well.
But it was a pleasure getting to learn from you
and hear about all the different projects
you're working on across the university.
This was awesome.
Thank you very much, everyone.
Thanks for your time.
And thanks, Rachel and Paz for having me.
And if anyone has questions,
you can find me in all the normal spaces.
Sounds great.
Thanks, everybody.